---
title: "Strategic start and finish lines"
date: 2020-10-05
tags: [productivity,time management,project management]
---

When you start a side project you think about ways it could bring you joy,
fame, money or whatever makes you happy, but how much do you think about the
actual finish line.

# Path of least resistance

If you're someone that enjoys building stuff and you don't mind making your own
business a reality, you probably faced this duality of focusing on the starting
or the finishing line.  Focusing on the starting line, means choosing the path
of least resistance, i.e. do whatever is necessary to getting started, and
experimenting with any ideas that come to your mind regardless of whether it's
worth your time or not.  When you start building something for fun, you don't
care much about finishing it, it doesn't hurt much if you abandon the whole
thing early on. No one will ever know about your failure and you're safe from
judgements.  It makes it extremely easy to start a new project and work on new
ideas. You don't need to think about who will use it or will it ever finish.
Basically you do it because it's cool, because it's fun, you can stop when it's
not fun anymore, no strings attached.  This can be a dangerous attitude if you
care about actually building something which is used by real people for
long-term, because the more projects you abandon, the less committed you will
be to shipping the one product that will eventually make you rich.  Chances are
your first or second or third idea is not the one that you want to focus on, if
you don't allow yourself to experiment, you will not get a chance to find the
one that's worthy.  However if you decided to build something for longer term,
keeping that attitude leads to disaster. You would need to stop thinking about
the fun and start focusing on actually finishing the project.

# SMART Goal

It's always easy to get side-tracked to do something that is not immediately
going to bring you one step closer to the finish line, those things add more
work over time because they prevent you from doing something that actually
matters and because they will have maintenance costs.  The finish line needs to
be well-defined, otherwise it will be more like a mirage, it moves every time
you get closer to it.  A SMART goal helps you subtract the things that are
irrelevant to your success, without that you won't know what success looks
like. If you're not the only one working on your project this is even more
important, because a team without a SMART goal is group of people with no
directions.

# Conclusion

Depending on what state of mind and which stage of making, you should choose
your strategy and focus. If you're full of new ideas but you're struggling to
get started, stop focusing on the consequences and start building things.
Learn as you go, use no-code tools to build websites, build fast, fail often,
worry not.  When you do that, there will be products that gain attention and it
will be rewarding, think about monetizing the product to make it sustainable
for you, make a clear goal for your product keeping the money in mind.  Write
    down your goal, make sure it's “SMART”, make short term goals that bring
    you closer to the final goal. Focus on the finish line, whatever doesn't
    bring you closer to your goal, is not worth your time.
