
---
title: "What full-time jobs have taught me so far?"
date: 2020-12-15
tags: [productivity,teamwork,management]
---

Before I started working a full-time software job, I was a freelance developer.
I always worked alone and the only thing that mattered was delivering on time
and budget.  When I first started my full-time job in a SaaS company, I thought
the first and foremost thing in that business is software, I couldn't be more
wrong. The first and foremost thing is the people. I strongly believe that's
true for every business.  The most important thing in every business is the
people. Let me elaborate, if you get the people right, you are very close to
success. If you get the software right, but the people wrong, you are on the
path to doom.

# Reasonings

People not only make software but also keep software alive Writing a successful
piece of software does not mean you have a successful business Your developers
leave their signature everywhere in the user experience The right people help
to bring even more right people in The right people make the right culture Let
me elaborate on each.

# Maintainability

Writing great software is only the beginning, software is a living and
breathing being. You can't expect it to work and keep working forever, OS
updates, library deprecation, security vulnerabilities are only a few reasons
you can't leave software running forever without maintenance.  The right people
not only take deadlines and finishing of the projects into consideration, they
also make sure they leave a good legacy for their future self or others that
might work on the software.  Plus the next people working on the software
should also think about ways of improving it. As technologies evolve, so does
software. A great piece of software 10 years ago may not look as great today.

# Communication

Have you heard about 10x developers? Geniuses that finish the projects more
effective than everybody else? What's their secret ingredient? Apart from
technical competence, which of course is a requirement, they are very good with
people. They can communicate with stakeholders to extract the requirements
effectively and turn them into code.  They can also work with the rest of the
team effectively, knowing how to break tasks, estimate, distribute, and track
them. In other words, they know how software is not made in silos, and make use
of everyone in the team to achieve greatness.

# User experience

Users can tell when the developers care about their craft. It is obvious from
the user experience, support and documentation, especially your most loyal
customers.  If you think you can get by with too many features, and subpar
quality, expect to have a high churn rate. Users will switch to the first
better alternative.  However if your users feel that you care, even if your
software is not perfect, you can expect them to give you constructive feedback
and even occasional help offers, especially if your code is open-source.

# Hiring the right people

Great people usually have a great network of previous co-workers, co-authors
and simply more connections.  If you want to hire great people certainly having
the right people in your team already helps.  Company culture The right people,
build the right company and team culture, that lasts. It automatically excludes
the people that hurt the productivity and morale.  The right culture will also
help with scalability of your company and software.

# Conclusion

I couldn't be more wrong to think that people come after software, when I was a
freelance developer and my only goal was to deliver high-quality software on
time and within budget.  That mindset might be good for a solo developer but is
not scalable. If you are building a software business, your focus should be to
find the right people to build your team.  The right people will also make sure
software is of the best quality and they tend to leave a good legacy for the
future.
